docs: add status icons example to icon documentation (#5489)
grommet/hpe-design-system: aries-site/src/pages/foundation/icons.mdx

  href="https://github.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/wiki/Migrating-from-grommet%E2%80%90icons-to-@hpe%E2%80%90design%5Cicons%E2%80%90grommet"
  target="_blank"
  rel="noreferrer noopener"
  secondary
/>

## Icon sizes

The default icon size is medium. Icons can be scaled using predefined size options to align with the [typography scale](/foundation/typography), ensuring consistent vertical rhythm and proper inline alignment with text.

<Example code="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/master/aries-site/src/examples/foundation/icons/IconSizeExample.js">
  <IconSizeExample />
</Example>

## Icon color

Standalone icon components use the default color token `icon-default`.\
Decorative icons may also use `icon-strong` `icon-weak` `icon-disabled` or `icon-primary` to convey emphasis or state.

Non-semantic icons, such as brand or third-party SVGs, should display their native colors. To preserve their original styling, apply the prop `color="plain"`.

<Example code="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/master/aries-site/src/examples/foundation/icons/IconPlainExample.js">
  <IconPlainExample />
</Example>

## Status icons

> Status icons are reserved for drawing attention to information about system health.

Author: Created a followup issue for status colors.
https://github.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/issues/5516

<Example code="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/master/aries-site/src/examples/foundation/icons/IconStatusExample.js">
  <IconStatusExample />
</Example>

## Aligning with text

When icons appear inline with text, set the `height` to match the text's size prop to ensure visual alignment.

<Example code="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/master/aries-site/src/examples/foundation/icons/IconHeightExample.js">

>   <IconHeightExample />

Reviewer: Wondering if this example should be in the format of our do/don't examples?
<img width="741" height="306" alt="Screenshot 2025-11-17 at 4 34 20 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d517877d-366f-404a-b38c-e4e2b1055e67" />

<Example
  docs="https://icons.grommet.io/?theme=hpe"
  code="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/master/aries-site/src/examples/foundation/icons/IconComponentExample.js"
  figma="https://www.figma.com/design/Hio1n5z95fdxSxuS86dLqJ/HPE-Icons---V2?node-id=66-13&t=S5gUdNzCkbPmEoZF-1"
>
  <IconComponentExample />
</Example>

## Core icons

The following common icons should be used as described in order to provide a consistent and clear experience for the user.

### Resource actions

These icons represent actions that create, update, or delete saved resources.

<IconResourceActionsExample />

### UI actions

These icons represent actions that move the user to a new view or context within the interface.

<IconUIActionsExample />

### UI controls

These icons represent actions that adjust or toggle the state of an individual component.

<IconControlsExample />

### Info and help

These icons support users by offering extra context, guidance, or help content.

<IconInformationalExample />

## Accessibility

### Screen reader
Each icon includes an `aria-label` to support screen readers.\

> Use the `11yTitle` prop to override or customize the default label when needed.\

Author: Thanks Mike! 
I read that so many time that my brain was adding in the A.
Fixed and pushed.

  IconHeightExample,
  IconPlainExample,
  IconSizeExample,
  IconStatusExample,
  IconTextExample,
} from '../../examples';

{/* TODO replace with DS icon package when available */}
import { Figma } from 'grommet-icons';

Icons can appear as stand-alone decorative elements or be embedded within components such as buttons and tabs to enhance usability and recognition. They provide quick visual cues that help users interpret actions and content at a glance.

Icons should support recognition, not create ambiguity. Familiar, universal symbols (e.g., search, delete, close) can stand alone, while less common icons should be paired with a label to ensure clarity. Thoughtful, consistent use prevents overuse or misuse, avoiding the confusion caused by unclear or inconsistent symbolism.

> The HPE icon library is semantically named to indicate each icon’s intended usage. Every icon includes metadata to improve discovery and provide additional context about its purpose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Icon naming

The HPE icon library uses semantically named icons to indicate intended usage. Every icon includes metadata to improve discovery and provide additional context about its purpose.
```

```suggestion
Icons in the HPE icon library are semantically named to indicate each icon’s intended usage. Every icon includes metadata to improve discovery and provide additional context about its purpose.
```

- Use icons only when their meaning is clear and purposeful.
- Pair unfamiliar icons with a text label to aid comprehension.
- If an icon always needs a label to be understood, consider using text alone.
- Avoid re-using the same symbol for different meanings across products.
- Keep icons visually consistent with the library’s size, and color standards.

> - Use decorative icons sparingly — they should enhance, not distract.

Reviewer 2: Actually, the "Open in Figma" button is indented in the markdown. Removing the indentation from the button resolves the list item spacing issue.

  <Button
    icon={<Figma color="plain" />}
    label="Open in Figma"
    target="_blank"
    secondary
    href="https://www.figma.com/design/Hio1n5z95fdxSxuS86dLqJ/HPE-Icons-V2-%E2%80%93-Production?node-id=0-1"
    rel="noreferrer noopener"
    alignSelf="start"
  />

> ### Developing with HPE Icons

Reviewer 2: @SeamusLeonardHPE - This has not been addressed yet. Our docs should apply proper semantic headings. Currently this content is skipping from h1 --> h3

  IconHeightExample,
  IconPlainExample,
  IconSizeExample,
  IconStatusExample,
  IconTextExample,
} from '../../examples';

{/* TODO replace with DS icon package when available */}
import { Figma } from 'grommet-icons';

Icons can appear as stand-alone decorative elements or be embedded within components such as buttons and tabs to enhance usability and recognition. They provide quick visual cues that help users interpret actions and content at a glance.

> Icons should support recognition, not create ambiguity. Familiar, universal symbols (e.g., search, delete, close) can stand alone, while less common icons should be paired with a label to ensure clarity. Thoughtful, consistent use prevents overuse or misuse, avoiding the confusion caused by unclear or inconsistent symbolism.

Reviewer 3: Could we get rid of this paragraph? It repeats the information you have in the bullet points

Icons in the HPE icon library are semantically named to indicate each icon’s intended usage. Every icon includes metadata to improve discovery and provide additional context about its purpose.

- Use icons only when their meaning is clear and purposeful.
- Pair unfamiliar icons with a text label to aid comprehension.
- If an icon always needs a label to be understood, consider using text alone.
- Avoid re-using the same symbol for different meanings across products.
- Keep icons visually consistent with the library’s size, and color standards.
- Use decorative icons sparingly — they should enhance, not distract.

> <Button

Reviewer 3: Suggestion: have the resources linked directly under the title+subtitle of the page and add sections towards the bottom of the page for implementation details, if needed.
@SeamusLeonardHPE not sure if it's something for now though, so let me know what you think

  icon={<Figma color="plain" />}
  label="Open in Figma"
  target="_blank"
  secondary
  href="https://www.figma.com/design/Hio1n5z95fdxSxuS86dLqJ/HPE-Icons-V2-%E2%80%93-Production?node-id=0-1"
  rel="noreferrer noopener"
  alignSelf="start"
/>

> ### Developing with HPE Icons

Reviewer: Can we add a link to the icons storybook in this section?
Here is the link: https://hpe-design-icons-grommet.netlify.app/

Author: Thanks for the link, very helpful! 
Added in this format @jcfilben let me know if thats acceptable

Explore the [HPE Icons Storybook](https://hpe-design-icons-grommet.netlify.app/) for interactive examples and implementation details.

  secondary
/>

### Icon sizes

The default icon size is medium. Icons can be scaled using predefined size options to align with our typography scale, ensuring consistent vertical rhythm and proper inline alignment with text.

<Example code="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/master/aries-site/src/examples/foundation/icons/IconSizeExample.js">
  <IconSizeExample />
</Example>

### Icon color

Standalone icon components use the default color token **icon-default**.\

> Decorative icons may also use **icon-strong**, **icon-weak**, **icon-disabled**, or **icon-primary** to convey emphasis or state.\

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Decorative icons may also use **icon-strong**, **icon-weak**, **icon-disabled**, or **icon-primary** to convey emphasis or state.
```

> Decorative icons may also use **icon-strong**, **icon-weak**, **icon-disabled**, or **icon-primary** to convey emphasis or state.\

Reviewer 2: We should align on a content style guide related to how we represent values, either inline code markdown or bold, but not both. 

```suggestion
Decorative icons may also use `icon-strong`, `icon-weak`, `icon-disabled`, or `icon-primary` to convey emphasis or state.
```

cc: @julauxen

> Non-semantic icons, such as brand or third-party SVGs, should display their native colors. To preserve their original styling, apply the prop **color="plain"**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Non-semantic icons, such as brand or third-party SVGs, should display their native colors. To preserve their original styling, apply the prop `color="plain"`.
```

<Example code="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/master/aries-site/src/examples/foundation/icons/IconPlainExample.js">
  <IconPlainExample />
</Example>

### Status icons

> Status icons are reserved for drawing attention to information about system health. They must be paired with the appropriate status color as defined by brand.

Reviewer 2: If I am a reader and reach this, what's the "appropriate status color"? How do I answer this question?

Opportunity for cross-linking to status colors definition.

cc: @julauxen

Author: The coded example below this text has the correct color assigned to each status icon.

I could add a UL with the status icon name + color?

<Example code="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/master/aries-site/src/examples/foundation/icons/IconStatusExample.js">
  <IconStatusExample />
</Example>

> ### Align with text

Reviewer 2: Thanks.

When icons are displayed inline with text in a row using align="start", apply a height property to the icon.
Set the height value to match the T-shirt size of the accompanying text — for example, use height="medium" when placed beside medium (default) text.

The height property is only required when the parent row uses align="start".

In the HPE theme, icons are sized relative to font size rather than line height. This provides a more balanced visual relationship between icons and text. Applying a height value ensures the icon receives the correct top and bottom padding to align visually with the text’s line height.

<Example code="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/grommet/hpe-design-system/master/aries-site/src/examples/foundation/icons/IconHeightExample.js">
  <IconHeightExample />
</Example>

### Accessibility

Each icon includes an aria-label to support screen readers.\
Use the **a11yTitle** prop to override or customize the default label when needed.\

> Ensure icon colors maintain sufficient contrast against their background in accordance with WCAG guidelines.

Reviewer 4: Should we be talking about when it's decorative (aria-hidden) vs needing a better aria-label than the default? Seems like this is something that happens a lot it seems.
